---
title: "RTP over QUIC"
docname: draft-engelbart-rtp-over-quic-latest
category: std
date: {DATE}

ipr: trust200902
area: ART
workgroup: AVTCORE
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]
submissiontype: IETF

author:
 -
    ins: J. Ott
    name: JÃ¶rg Ott
    organization: Technical University Munich
    email: ott@in.tum.de
 -
    ins: M. Engelbart
    name: Mathis Engelbart
    organization: Technical University Munich
    email: mathis.engelbart@gmail.com

--- abstract

This document specifies a minimal mapping for encapsulating RTP and RTCP packets
within QUIC. It also discusses how to leverage state from the QUIC
implementation in the endpoints to reduce the exchange of RTCP packets and how
to implement congestion control.

--- middle

# Introduction

The Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) {{!RFC3550}} is generally used to carry
real-time media for conversational media sessions, such as video conferences,
across the Internet.  Since RTP requires real-time delivery and is tolerant to
packet losses, the default underlying transport protocol has been UDP, recently
with DTLS on top to secure the media exchange and occasionally TCP (and possibly
TLS) as a fallback.  With the advent of QUIC {{!RFC9000}} and, most notably, its
unreliable DATAGRAM extension {{!RFC9221}}, another secure transport protocol
becomes available.  QUIC and its DATAGRAMs combine desirable properties for
real-time traffic (e.g., no unnecessary retransmissions, avoiding head-of-line
blocking) with a secure end-to-end transport that is also expected to work well
through NATs and firewalls.

Moreover, with QUIC's multiplexing capabilities, reliable and unreliable
transport connections as, e.g., needed for WebRTC, can be established with only
a single port used at either end of the connection.  This document defines a
mapping of how to carry RTP over QUIC. The focus is on RTP and RTCP packet
mapping and on reducing the amount of RTCP traffic by leveraging state
information readily available within a QUIC endpoint. This document also
describes different options for implementing congestion control for RTP over
QUIC.

The scope of this document is limited to unicast RTP/RTCP.

Note that this draft is similar in spirit to but differs in numerous ways from
{{?I-D.draft-hurst-quic-rtp-tunnelling}}.

# Terminology and Notation

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 {{!RFC2119}} {{!RFC8174}}
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

The following terms are used:

Datagram:
: Datagrams exist in UDP as well as in QUICs unreliable datagram extension. If not explicitly noted
differently, the term datagram in this document refers to a QUIC Datagram as defined in
{{!RFC9221}}.

Endpoint:
: A QUIC server or client that participates in an RTP over QUIC session.

Frame:
: A QUIC frame as defined in {{!RFC9000}}.

Media Encoder:
: An entity that is used by an application to produce a stream of encoded media, which can be
packetized in RTP packets to be transmitted over QUIC.

Receiver:
: An endpoint that receives media in RTP packets and may send or receive RTCP packets.

Sender:
: An endpoint that sends media in RTP packets and may send or receive RTCP packets.

Packet diagrams in this document use the format defined in {{Section 1.3 of RFC9000}} to
illustrate the order and size of fields.

# Scope

# Protocol Overview

This document introduces a mapping of the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) to
the QUIC transport protocol. RTP over QUIC allows the use of QUIC streams and
unreliable QUIC datagrams to transport real-time data, and thus, the QUIC
implementation MUST support QUICs unreliable datagram extension, if RTP packets
should be sent over QUIC datagrams. Since datagram frames cannot be fragmented,
the QUIC implementation MUST also provide a way to query the maximum datagram
size so that an application can create RTP packets that always fit into a QUIC
datagram frame.

{{!RFC3550}} specifies that RTP sessions need to be transmitted on different
transport addresses to allow multiplexing between them. RTP over QUIC uses a
different approach to leverage the advantages of QUIC connections without
managing a separate QUIC connection per RTP session. QUIC does not provide
demultiplexing between different flows on datagrams but suggests that an
application implement a demultiplexing mechanism if required. An example of such
a mechanism are flow identifiers prepended to each datagram frame as described
in {{Section 2.1 of ?I-D.draft-ietf-masque-h3-datagram}}. RTP over QUIC uses a
flow identifier to replace the network address and port number to multiplex many
RTP sessions over the same QUIC connection.

A congestion controller can be plugged in to adapt the media bitrate to the
available bandwidth. This document does not mandate any congestion control
algorithm. Some examples include Network-Assisted Dynamic Adaptation (NADA)
{{!RFC8698}} and Self-Clocked Rate Adaptation for Multimedia (SCReAM)
{{!RFC8298}}. These congestion control algorithms require some feedback about
the network's performance to calculate target bitrates. Traditionally this
feedback is generated at the receiver and sent back to the sender via RTCP.
Since QUIC also collects some metrics about the network's performance, these
metrics can be used to generate the required feedback at the sender-side and
provide it to the congestion controller to avoid the additional overhead of the
RTCP stream.

# Connection Establishment and ALPN

QUIC requires the use of ALPN {{!RFC7301}} tokens during connection setup. RTP
over QUIC uses "rtp-mux-quic" as ALPN token in the TLS handshake (see also
{{iana-considerations}}.
Use of different RTP profiles does not require separate versions of ALPN tokens
since they can be mixed on the same connection.

> **Editor's note:** "rtp-mux-quic" indicates that RTP and other protocols may
> be multiplexed on the same QUIC connection using a flow identifier as
> described in {{encapsulation}}. Applications are responsible for negotiation
> of protocols in use by appropriate use of a signaling protocol such as SDP.

> **Editor's note:** This implies that applications cannot use RTP over QUIC as
> specified in this document over WebTransport.

## Draft version identification

> **RFC Editor's note:** Please remove this section prior to publication of a
> final version of this document.

RTP over QUIC uses the token "rtp-mux-quic" to identify itself in ALPN.

Only implementations of the final, published RFC can identify themselves as
"rtp-mux-quic". Until such an RFC exists, implementations MUST NOT identify
themselves using this string.

Implementations of draft versions of the protocol MUST add the string "-" and
the corresponding draft number to the identifier.  For example,
draft-engelbart-rtp-over-quic-04 is identified using the string
"rtp-mux-quic-04".

Non-compatible experiments that are based on these draft versions MUST append
the string "-" and an experiment name to the identifier.

# Encapsulation {#encapsulation}

QUIC supports two transport methods: reliable streams {{!RFC9000}} and
unreliable datagrams {{!RFC9221}}. This document specifies a mapping of RTP to
both of the transport modes. The encapsulation format for RTP over QUIC is
described in {{fig-payload}}.

{{quic-streams}} and {{quic-datagrams}} explain the specifics of mapping of RTP
to QUIC streams and QUIC datagrams respectively.

~~~
Payload {
  Flow Identifier (i),
  RTP/RTCP Packet (..)
}
~~~
{: #fig-payload title="RTP over QUIC Payload Format"}

Flow Identifier:

: Flow identifier to demultiplex different data flows on the same QUIC
connection.

RTP/RTCP Packet:

: The RTP/RTCP packet to transmit.

For multiplexing different RTP and other data streams on the same QUIC
connection, each RTP/RTCP packet is prefixed with a flow identifier. A flow
identifier is a QUIC variable-length integer which must be unique per stream.

RTP and RTCP packets of a single RTP session MAY be sent using the same flow
identifier (following the procedures defined in {{!RFC5761}}, or they MAY be
sent using different flow identifiers. The respective mode of operation MUST be
indicated using the appropriate signaling.

RTP and RTCP packets of different RTP sessions MUST be sent using different flow
identifiers.

Differentiating RTP/RTCP packets of different RTP sessions from non-RTP/RTCP
datagrams is the responsibility of the application by means of appropriate use
of flow identifiers and the corresponding signaling.

## QUIC Streams {#quic-streams}

An application MUST open a new QUIC stream for each Application Data Unit (ADU).
Each ADU MUST be encapsulated in a single RTP packet and the application MUST
not send more than one RTP packet per stream. Opening a new stream for each
packet adds implicit framing to RTP packets, allows to receive packets without
strict ordering and gives an application the possibility to cancel certain
packets.

Large RTP packets sent on a stream will be fragmented in smaller QUIC frames,
that are transmitted reliably and in order, such that a receiving application
can read a complete packet from the stream. No retransmission has to be
implemented by the application, since QUIC frames that are lost in transit are
retransmitted by the QUIC connection. If it is known to either the sender or the
receiver, that a packet, which was not yet successfully and completely
transmitted, is no longer needed, either side can close the stream.

> **Editor's Note:** We considered adding a framing like the one described in
> {{?RFC4571}} to send multiple RTP packets on one stream, but we don't think it
> is worth the additional overhead only to reduce the number of streams.
> Moreover, putting multiple ADUs into a single stream would also require
> defining policies when to use the same (and which) stream and when to open a
> new one.

## QUIC Datagrams {#quic-datagrams}

RTP packets can be sent in QUIC datagrams. QUIC datagrams are an extension to
QUIC described in {{!RFC9221}}. QUIC datagrams preserve frame boundaries, thus a
single RTP packet can be mapped to a single QUIC datagram, without the need for
an additional framing. Senders SHOULD consider the header overhead associated
with QUIC datagrams and ensure that the RTP/RTCP packets, including their
payloads, QUIC, and IP headers, will fit into path MTU.

If an application wishes to retransmit lost RTP packets, the retransmission has
to be implemented by the application by sending a new datagram for the RTP
packet, because QUIC datagrams are not retransmitted on loss (see also
{{transport-layer-feedback}} for loss signaling).

# RTCP {#rtcp}

The RTP Control Protocol (RTCP) allows RTP senders and receivers to exchange
control information to monitor connection statistics and to identify and
synchronize streams. Many of the statistics contained in RTCP packets overlap
with the connection statistics collected by a QUIC connection. To avoid using up
bandwidth for duplicated control information, the information SHOULD only be
sent at one protocol layer. QUIC relies on certain control frames to be sent.

In general, applications MAY send RTCP without any restrictions. This document
specifies a baseline for replacing some of the RTCP packet types by mapping the
contents to QUIC connection statistics. Future documents can extend this mapping
for other RTCP format types. It is RECOMMENDED to expose relevant information
from the QUIC layer to the application instead of exchanging addtional RTCP
packets, where applicable.

This section discusses what information can be exposed from the QUIC connection
layer to reduce the RTCP overhead and which type of RTCP messages cannot be
replaced by similar feedback from the transport layer. The list of RTCP packets
in this section is not exhaustive and similar considerations SHOULD be taken
into account before exchanging any other type of RTCP control packets.

## Transport Layer Feedback {#transport-layer-feedback}

This section explains how some of the RTCP packet types which are used to signal
reception statistics can be replaced by equivalent statistics that are already
collected by QUIC. The following list explains how this mapping can be achieved
for the individual fields of different RTCP packet types.

QUIC Datagrams are ack-eliciting packets, which means, that an acknowledgment is
triggered when a datagram frame is received. Thus, a sender can assume that an
RTP packet arrived at the receiver or was lost in transit, using the QUIC
acknowledgments of QUIC Datagram frames. In the following, an RTP packet is
regarded as acknowledged, when the QUIC Datagram frame that carried the RTP
packet, was acknowledged. For RTP packets that are sent over QUIC streams, an
RTP packet can be considered acknowledged, when all frames which carried
fragments of the RTP packet were acknowledged.

When QUIC Streams are used, the application should be aware that the direct
mapping proposed below may not reflect the real characteristics of the network.
RTP packet loss can seem lower than actual packet loss due to QUIC's automatic
retransmissions. Similarly, timing information might be incorrect due to
retransmissions.

Some of the transport layer feedback that can be implemented in RTCP contains
information that is not included in QUIC by default, but can be added via QUIC
extensions. One important example are arrival timestamps, which are not part of
QUIC's default acknowledgment frames, but can be added using
{{!I-D.draft-smith-quic-receive-ts}} or {{!I-D.draft-huitema-quic-ts}}. Another
extension, that can improve the precision of the feedback from QUIC is
{{!I-D.draft-ietf-quic-ack-frequency}}, which allows a sender to control the
delay of acknowledgments sent by the receiver.

* *Receiver Reports* (`PT=201`, `Name=RR`, {{!RFC3550}})
  * *Fraction lost*: The fraction of lost packets can be directly infered from
    QUIC's acknowledgments. The calculation SHOULD include all packets up to the
    acknowledged RTP packet with the highest RTP sequence number. Later packets
    SHOULD be ignored, since they may still be in flight, unless other QUIC
    packets that were sent after the datagram frame, were already acknowledged.
  * *Cumulative lost*: Similar to the fraction of lost packets, the cumulative
    loss can be infered from QUIC's acknowledgments including all packets up to
    the latest acknowledged packet.
  * *Highest Sequence Number received*: The highest sequence number received is
    the sequence number of all RTP packets that were acknowledged.
  * Interarrival jitter: If QUIC acknowledgments carry timestamps as described
    in one of the extensions referenced above, senders can infer from QUIC acks
    the interarrival jitter from the arrival timestamps.
  * Last SR: Similar to RTP arrival times, the arrival time of RTCP Sender
    Reports can be inferred from QUIC acknowledgments, if they include
    timestamps.
  * Delay since last SR: This field is not required when the receiver reports
    are entirely replaced by QUIC feedback.
* *Negative Acknowledgments* (`PT=205`, `FMT=1`, `Name=Generic NACK`,
  {{!RFC4585}})
  * The generic negative acknowledgment packet contains information about
    packets which the receiver considered lost. {{Section 6.2.1. of !RFC4585}}
    recommends to use this feature only, if the underlying protocol cannot
    provide similar feedback. QUIC does not provide negative acknowledgments,
    but can detect lost packets through acknowledgments.
* *ECN Feedback* (`PT=205`, `FMT=8`, `Name=RTCP-ECN-FB`, {{!RFC6679}})
  * ECN feedback packets report the count of observed ECN-CE marks. {{!RFC6679}}
    defines two RTCP reports, one packet type (with `PT=205` and `FMT=8`) and a
    new report block for the extended reports which are listed below. QUIC
    supports ECN reporting through acknowledgments. If the connection supports
    ECN, the reporting of ECN counts SHOULD be done using QUIC acknowledgments.
* *Congestion Control Feedback* (`PT=205`, `FMT=11`, `Name=CCFB`, {{!RFC8888}})
  * RTP Congestion Control Feedback contains acknowledgments, arrival timestamps
    and ECN notifications for each received packet. Acknowledgments and ECNs can
    be infered from QUIC as described above. Arrival timestamps can be added
    through extended acknowledgment frames as described in
    {{!I-D.draft-smith-quic-receive-ts}} or {{!I-D.draft-huitema-quic-ts}}.
* *Extended Reports* (`PT=207`, `Name=XR`, {{!RFC3611}})
  * Extended Reports offer an extensible framework for a variety of different
    control messages. Some of the standard report blocks which can be
    implemented in extended reports such as loss RLE or ECNs can be implemented
    in QUIC, too. For other report blocks, it SHOULD be evaluated individually,
    if the contained information can be transmitted using QUIC instead.

## Application Layer Repair and other Control Messages

While the previous section presented some RTCP packet that can be replaced by
QUIC features, QUIC cannot replace all of the available RTCP packet types. This
mostly affects RTCP packet types which carry control information that is to be
interpreted by the application layer instead of the transport itself.

*Sender Reports* (`PT=200`, `Name=SR`, {{!RFC3550}}) are similar to *Receiver
Reports*. They are sent by media senders and additionally contain a NTP and a
RTP timestamp and the number of packets and octets transmitted by the sender.
The timestamps can be used by a receiver to synchronize streams. QUIC cannot
provide a similar control information, since it does not know about RTP
timestamps. A QUIC receiver can also not calculate the packet or octet counts,
since it does not know about lost datagrams. Thus, sender reports are required
in RTP over QUIC to synchronize streams at the receiver. The sender reports
SHOULD not contain any receiver report blocks, as the information can be infered
from the QUIC transport as explained in the previous section.

Next to carrying transmission statistics, RTCP packets can contain application
layer control information, that cannot directly be mapped to QUIC. This includes
for example the *Source Description* (`PT=202`, `Name=SDES`), *Bye* (`PT=203`,
`Name=BYE`) and *Application* (`PT=204`, `Name=APP`) packet types from
{{!RFC3550}} or many of the payload specific feedback messages (`PT=206`)
defined in {{!RFC4585}}, which can for example be used to control the codec
behavior of the sender. Since QUIC does not provide any kind of application
layer control messaging, these RTCP packet types SHOULD be used in the same way
as they would be used over any other transport protocol.

# Congestion Control {#congestion-control}

Like any other application on the internet, RTP over QUIC needs to perform
congestion control to avoid overloading the network.

QUIC is a congestion controlled transport protocol. Senders are required to
employ some form of congestion control. The default congestion control specified
for QUIC is an alogrithm similar to TCP NewReno, but senders are free to choose
any congestion control algorithm as long as they follow the guidelines specified
in {{Section 3 of ?RFC8085}}.

RTP does not specify a congestion controller, but provides feedback formats for
congestion control (e.g. {{!RFC8888}}) as well as different congestion control
algorithms in separate RFCs (e.g. SCReAM {{!RFC8298}} and NADA {{!RFC8698}}).
The congestion control algorithms for RTP are specifically tailored for
real-time transmissions at low latencies. The available congestion control
algorithms for RTP expose a `target_bitrate` that can be used to dynamically
reconfigure media codecs to produce media at a rate that can be sent in
real-time under the observed network conditions.

This section defines two architectures for congestion control and bandwidth
estimation for RTP over QUIC, but it does not mandate any specific congestion
control algorithm to use.

It is assumed that the congestion controller in use provides a pacing mechanism
to determine when a packet can be sent to avoid bursts. The currently proposed
congestion control algorithms for real-time communications provide such pacing
mechanisms. The use of congestion controllers which don't provide a pacing
mechanism is out of scope of this document.

> **TODO:** Add considerations for bandwidth shares when a QUIC connection is
> shared between RTP and non-RTP streams?

## Congestion Control at the QUIC layer {#cc-quic-layer}

If congestion control is to be applied at the transport layer, it is RECOMMENDED
to configure the QUIC Implementation to use a delay-based real-time congestion
control algorithm instead of a loss-based algorithm. The currently available
delay-based congestion control algorithms depend on detailed arrival time
feedback to estimate the current one-way delay between sender and receiver.
Since QUIC does not provide arrival timestamps in its acknowledgments, the QUIC
implementations of the sender and receiver MUST use an extension to add this
information to QUICs acknowledgment frames, e.g.
{{!I-D.draft-smith-quic-receive-ts}}.

If congestion control is done by the QUIC implementation, the application needs
a mechanism to query the currently available bandwidth to adapt media codec
configurations. The employed congestion controller of the QUIC connection SHOULD
expose such an API to the application. If a current bandwidth estimation is not
available from the QUIC congestion controller, the sender can either implement
an alternative bandwidth estimation at the application layer as described in
{{cc-application-layer}} or a receiver can feedback the observed bandwidth
through RTCP, e.g., using {{?I-D.draft-alvestrand-rmcat-remb}}.

> **Editor's note:** An alternative to the hard requirement to use a timestamp
> extension could be to use RTCP, but that would mean, that an application has
> to negotiate RTCP congestion control feedback which would then have to be
> passed to the QUIC congestion controller.

> **Editor's note:** How can a QUIC connection be shared with non-RTP streams,
> when SCReAM/NADA/GCC is used as congestion controller? Can these algorithms be
> adapted to allow different streams including non-real-time streams? Do they
> even have to be adapted or *should* this just work?

## Congestion Control at the Application Layer {#cc-application-layer}

If an application cannot access a bandwidth estimation from the QUIC layer, or
the QUIC implementation does not support a delay-based, low-latency congestion
control algorithm, it can alternatively implement a bandwidth estimation
algorithm at the application layer. Calculating a bandwidth estimation at the
application layer can be done using the same bandwidth estimation algorithms as
described in {{congestion-control}} (NADA, SCReAM). The bandwidth estimation
algorithm typically needs some feedback on the transmission performance. This
feedback can be collected following the guidelines in {{rtcp}}.

If the application implements full congestion control rather than just a
bandwidth estimation at the application layer using a congestion controller that
satisfies the requirements of {{Section 7 of !RFC9002}}, and the connection is
only used to send real-time media which is subject to the application layer
congestion control, it is RECOMMENDED to disable any other congestion control
that is possibly running at the QUIC layer. Disabling the additional congestion
controllers helps to avoid any interference between the different congestion
controllers.

# API Considerations

The mapping described in the previous sections poses some interface requirements
on the QUIC implementation. Although a basic mapping should work without any of
these requirements most of the optimizations regarding congestion control and
RTCP mapping require certain functionalities to be exposed to the application.
The following to sections contain a list of information that is required by an
application to implement different optimizations ({{quic-api-read}}) and
functions that a QUIC implementation SHOULD expose to an application
({{quic-api-write}}).

Each item in the following list can be considered individually. Any exposed
information or function can be used by RTP over QUIC regardless of whether the
other items are available. Thus, RTP over QUIC does not depend on the
availability of all of the listed features but can apply different optimizations
depending on the functionality exposed by the QUIC implementation.

## Information to be exported from QUIC {#quic-api-read}

This section provides a list of items that an application might want to export
from an underlying QUIC implementation. It is thus RECOMMENDED that a QUIC
implementation exports the listed items to the application.

* *Maximum Datagram Size*: The maximum datagram size that the QUIC connection
  can transmit.
* *Datagram Acknowledgment and Loss*: {{Section 5.2 of !RFC9221}} allows QUIC
  implementations to notify the application that a QUIC Datagram was
  acknowledged or that it believes a datagram was lost. The exposed information
  SHOULD include enough information to allow the application to maintain a
  mapping between the datagram that was acknowledged/lost and the RTP packet
  that was sent in that datagram.
* *Stream States*: The QUIC implementation SHOULD expose to a sender, how much
  of the data that was sent on a stream was successfully delivered and how much
  data is still outstanding to be sent or retransmitted.
* *Arrival timestamps*: If the QUIC connection uses a timestamp extension like
  {{I-D.draft-smith-quic-receive-ts}} or {{I-D.draft-huitema-quic-ts}}, the
  arrival timestamps or one-way delays SHOULD be exposed to the application.
* *ECN*: If ECN marks are available, they SHOULD be exposed to the application.

## Functions to be exposed by QUIC {#quic-api-write}

This sections lists functions that a QUIC implementation SHOULD expose to an
application to implement different features of the mapping described in the
previous sections of this document.

* *Cancel Streams*: To allow an application to cancel (re)transmission of
  packets that are no longer needed, the QUIC implementation MUST expose a way
  to cancel the corresponding QUIC streams.
* *Select Congestion Controller*: If congestion control is to be implemented at
  the QUIC connection layer as described in {{cc-quic-layer}}, the application
  must be able to choose an appropriate congestion control algorithm.
* *Disable Congestion Controller*: If congestion control is to be implemented at
  the application layer as described in {{cc-application-layer}}, and the
  application layer is trusted to apply adequate congestion control, it is
  RECOMMENDEDto allow the application to disable QUIC layer congestion control
  entirely.

# Discussion

## Flow Identifier

{{!RFC9221}} suggests to use flow identifiers to multiplex different streams on
QUIC Datagrams, which is implemented in {{encapsulation}}, but it is unclear how
applications can combine RTP over QUIC with other data streams using the same
QUIC connections. If the non-RTP data streams use the same flow identifies, too
and the application can make sure, that flow identifiers are unique, there
should be no problem. Flow identifiers could be problematic, if different
specifications for RTP and non-RTP data streams over QUIC mandate different
incompatible flow identifiers.

## Impact of Connection Migration

# Security Considerations

RTP over QUIC is subject to the security considerations of RTP described in
{{Section 9 of !RFC3550}} and the security considerations of any RTP profile in
use.

The security considerations for the QUIC protocol and datagram extension
described in {{Section 21 of !RFC9000}}, {{Section 9 of !RFC9001}}, {{Section 8
of !RFC9002}} and {{Section 6 of !RFC9221}} also apply to RTP over QUIC.

# IANA Considerations {#iana-considerations}

## Registration of a RTP over QUIC Identification String

This document creates a new registration for the identification of RTP over QUIC
in the "TLS Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation (ALPN) Protocol IDs" registry
{{?RFC7301}}.

The "rtp-mux-quic" string identifies RTP over QUIC:

  Protocol:
  : RTP over QUIC

  Identification Sequence:
  : 0x72 0x74 0x70 0x2D 0x6F 0x76 0x65 0x72 0x2D 0x71 0x75 0x69 0x63 ("rtp-mux-quic")

  Specification:
  : This document

--- back

# Experimental Results

An experimental implementation of the mapping described in this document can be
found on [Github](https://github.com/mengelbart/rtp-over-quic). The application
implements the RTP over QUIC Datagrams mapping and implements SCReAM congestion
control at the application layer. It can optionally disable the builtin QUIC
congestion control (NewReno). The endpoints only use RTCP for congestion control
feedback, which can optionally be disabled and replaced by the QUIC connection
statistics as described in {{transport-layer-feedback}}.

Experimental results of the implementation can be found on
[Github](https://github.com/mengelbart/rtp-over-quic-mininet), too.


# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

The authors would like to thank Spencer Dawkins, Lucas Pardue and David Schinazi
for their valuable comments and suggestions contributing to this document.
